---
layout: post
title: Why Post Here?
author: Greg
tags: meta
---

I can tell how much I'm procrastinating actually writing a blog post 
because of how much time I've spent messing around with the appearance 
of this website, and other fiddly deatils -- which is a bummer because 
they were supposed to be secondary.

As a lifehack for coming up with a first topic to write about my first post will be so naval-gazey and meta that I'll want to quickly write another one
to hide how horrible this first one is. 

---

So why am I, a person who has a [twitter](https://twitter.com/gregfreedman) 
with 0 tweets, a facebook page devoted almost enirely to the once-a-year 
phenomenon of people being reminded about my birthday, and who otherwise 
spends his time lurking rather than posting, making a blog?

## 1) Other places never felt right ##
It feels weird to blather on about the topics I'm 
interested in on social media sites. Perhaps I have an overly-
compartmentalized identity, but I don't love the conflation of 
friendship with the expectation that you'll be interested in what I 
have to say about, for example, data visualization. At best, posts on 
social media feel to me like two people shouting a conversation to make 
sure everyone hears how smart/funny/whatever they are. I hope by 
separating my writing away, I won't be doing that. 

## 2) Need to practice writing ##
I'm trying to change my atitude from "I'm (inherently) not good at writing" to 
"I'm not good at writing (yet)", since the 
[pop-psychology](http://www.radiolab.org/story/91971-secrets-of-success/) 
of the day says this can be effective. We'll see if it replicates ;)

---

I remember enough from high school english that I should have [3 
points to my thesis](http://ualr.edu/blackboard/2013/10/23/the-a-paper-writing-stronger-papers/) 
- but this new rebel version of me trying to actually enjoy writing refuses.
